we have a big
profound long-term problem in our
culture
in that we can't talk about
what is optimal
as something quite separate from the
question of what is good
in the sense of morally good now we're
confused about this for cultural reasons
for religious reasons but even for
linguistic reasons that we talk about
good and bad
in a way that's always
like intentionally or unintentionally
confusing
what's advantageous
with what's actually morally superior or
morally inferior you know
and when we talk about things being
optimal
then we start to raise a lot of really
interesting amoral questions that
otherwise get kind of suffocated by the
morality discourse right
optimal
for whom
for what purpose
to what ends
you know it's it's really easy to say to
someone be easy to say to my gorgeous 28
year old girlfriend
that she would be better off
dumping me
to get with a 28 year old lawyer let's
just say someone's the same age as
herself she's 28 this theoretical lawyer
is trying let's say let's say you even
have a friend let's say you know a guy
who is a 28 year old lawyer and you say
to melissa you get in their instagram
dance look let me introduce you to this
particular guy i know
who's a 28 year old lawyer and you say
something like this is how we talk in
our culture you say
it would be better for you it would be
better
it would be good do you really mean
morally good
are you really presenting an ethical
argument as to why people should be with
someone
the same age
or are you saying it'd be better for her
it'd be better for this guy and it'd be
better you know for what ends
for what outcomes now
just digress being a lawyer is a
miserable job despite what you may have
seen
on television despite what you may have
seen on ally mcbeal seasons one through
three it's a miserable boring job and
most guys whatever spark of creativity
whatever humanitarian instincts they had
whatever impulse to make the world a
better place they had before they went
into law school by the time they finish
law school it's
gone here in canada after law school you
go into a long internship that's called
articling it's a little bit different
from country to country
and that absolutely beats you into being
this kind of dreamless conformist now
being in a relationship with a lawyer
let's even say let's even say being the
housewife of a lawyer because this
lawyer is is making making enough money
you know to keep you as as a woman
is that
is that good
is that advantageous is that
optimal
right for whom
and from what perspective now wouldn't
there be
another perspective
i'm not saying there are only two
there'll be another perspective out of
hundreds or thousands in which you could
say to a young woman you know what you
really need to get
as a young man who's got nothing
and then whatever you two have in your
lives you can get that together
like you can start a business together
you can scramble and work hard and go
from poor to rich to get so whatever it
is you have you've earned together and
you understand that you appreciate
together like maybe what's best would be
a life that in that sense really is
cooperative together maybe that's
more important than a difference in age
of of five years or ten years right i
mean there are so many things that are
more important than an age gap
now again if you know particular people
okay well
what if your choice
is between being with someone your own
age
who has a drug habit
with a drug addiction let's just say
it's a kind of mediocre drug addiction
he's a guy who smokes weed
five days a week and gets drunk two days
a week and uses uh illicit party drugs
like mdma a couple times a month these
days a lot of people wouldn't even call
that drug addiction i would
okay so if you're a young woman you can
be with a guy who lives that kind of
lifestyle that's who he is today
and you're rolling the dice if you get
into a serious relationship this guy
you're rolling the dice on what kind of
guy he's going to be 10 years from now
five years now but even even two years
from now
i have uh i have a female friend and she
used to be with a guy who was a
sports journalist
and he drank a lot and smoked a lot and
i think did a lot of soft drugs like
like marijuana and you know that's cute
for a couple years you can imagine a guy
who's kind of gregarious uh
self-confident and
sociable affable guy watches a lot of
sports and drinks and carries on oh oh
yeah that doesn't age well
holy after just a couple years
doesn't age well oh okay so you found
someone your own age and just just this
one factor
or
you could be with a man who's 10 years
older and is completely resolutely sober
and hard-working all the time this is
just one factor
there are so many factors in choosing
between people and the point is here
even if you were to concede the point
which none of us should concede
if you were to concede the point that it
is not optimal for you to be in a
relationship with someone older than
yourself why i mean we gotta question
that why why is it not optimal but even
if you were to concede the point that
it's not optimal
that doesn't in any way
make an argument
for it being immoral for it being wrong
so the second big big point i want to
talk about here and this is the reason
why i have
dragged in the concept of beta male even
into the title of this video now
it's a despicable concept beta male does
absolutely no scientific validity it's
even a sense in which it doesn't have
any
cultural validity
what i see going on in the critique of
keemstar keemstar is a 39 year old man
20 year old girlfriend
what i see is the claim that it doesn't
matter that she's over 18. you know it
doesn't matter that she's a legal adult
you know that she still has to be
infantilized she still has to be treated
as a
child
because of an inequality of power
between the two of them
now the implications of that are really
interesting because what you're claiming
implicitly or explicitly is that each
and every one of us
should either be in a relationship where
the two parties can equally
bully one another like
everyone can equally impose their will
another there's a parody in in power
right
or you mean to suggest that every man
should be in a relationship in which
he's dominated
by the woman in which you really have in
this sense
a kind of
beta male morality or your moral
ideology is that men should never
be the dominant partner in a
relationship now i've talked about this
in past videos from a different angle
and a lot
a lot of people today they only know
about sexual morality via the internet
via television via movies not from
knowing real people in real life and
their real experiences not from really
living with and watching real
relationships and how they come together
and how they fall apart and what the
advantages of disadvantages are and also
you may know people face to face but
they're never really honest with you you
can know someone for for 10 years and
every day they say oh yeah i'm happily
married it's going great i'm happily
married it's going great and then one
day they tell you they're getting
divorced and they hate that person and
they're never going to talk to them
and you never got a sense of what the
what the progression was what the issues
were that they told them toward them
apart what the uh
what the conflicts were
um now you know
if you know real people in real
relationships you could have a seemingly
dominant older man let's just say he's a
lawyer stick with the same and he's out
earning a lot of money as a lawyer all
day
and the reality is that his younger
housewife dominates and controls and
makes the decisions for everything else
in his life
everything
and why
partly because he doesn't have time
and he doesn't have energy so you can
meet you can meet these guys they have a
they have again a seemingly younger
seemingly submissive wife
and if you ask them like oh gee that's
funny you drive a range rover why did
you choose to drive a ranger oh i didn't
choose it my wife chose
you know and
oh gee you you went on you went on
vacation to cabo san lucas that's i i
wouldn't want to go why did you go there
oh man no it's not me my my wife joe she
chooses where we go on vacation
and like yeah
hey dude that's that's kind of a weird
tie a tie with like these little fish
why are you wearing that my wife chose
the time like you can know dudes where
every element of their lives and what
they're eating for lunch today
is chosen by their wives
what is dominance right what are the
decisions being made in the relationship
again one of the reasons maybe he's he
may tell you all of his time and energy
is just going into making money
then everything else in their lives like
how they spend money how they live what
they actually do short-term and
long-term plans those are being made you
know by his by his wife and that may
include whether or not they have kids
and when they have kids and where
they're going to retire to and what like
and what charities they're involved with
or their political identity
you can meet a lot of guys in that
situation it's like yeah well i'm not
i'm not really a conservative republican
but my wife is and she get you know she
takes me to these events really across
the board there are guys who are not
religious but their wife is you know
all these all these things happen you
know anyway so we got we got comments
coming in i'm gonna pay attention to the
comments when i can guys but you
understand that priorities here
first 10 minutes of the video
uh
i'm still on a roll okay so
you know
again these two issues overlap right
like
what is
optimal i understand on a chalkboard
it's really easy to claim well the
optimal situation for a human
relationship is that nobody dominates
anyone else right that nobody no one
person
makes the decisions for
another person you know just saying when
i was younger i really i really felt
that i mean i really felt like
something as simple as buying airplane
tickets or buying bus tickets or train
tickets for the two of us as a couple i
want to have this democracy i wanted to
be able to sit there and like even
though they're only two votes
really talk this through and really
involve one another in the decision okay
what are we what are we going to do
about this what are we deciding as a
couple whereas a family even only has
two people and i didn't have kids back
then
i have one kid now for my ex-wife that i
never get to see but
you know i i really i really did feel
that way
but for most people most of the time
whether you call it dominance or you
call it laziness or whether you call it
having a kind of complementary
set of asymmetrical roles
one person is going to choose the
airplane tickets for the both of them
they're going to make that decision
because they don't have time they don't
have time to involve the other person
and one person are there a couple there
are couples where the woman buys the
clothes for the man if there are couples
with a man that's close to the woman you
know you're making decisions for that
other person you hope they like it and
so on but where you are showing a lot of
initiative where there is i mean
in most relationships there are some
areas where the woman dominates the man
she's making the decisions showing the
initiative and there are some
you know fields within which the man you
know dominates the woman so you know
i think there is this implicit claim
nobody is really thinking through that
in relationships
person should not dominate another and
maybe you know what we're refusing to
admit to ourselves is that all
relationships involve dominion that in
principle all of us are in turn you know
like not consistently not in the same
role every day each of us dominates and
is is dominated within a relationship
now i know this may sound odd but let's
let's compare this even to our concept
of
democracy
and what what is the is democracy the
ideal that nobody gets dominated by
anyone else no
no we come together we make decisions
for example you you vote on a referendum
it's an example of direct democracy and
all of us
are
in a sense
dominated by behold into the results the
outcome just say aristotle is one of the
most explicit theorists on this and he
does make the comparison to marriage
interestingly you know um
aristotle doesn't exactly believe in the
gender gender equity but it's a topic
for another video what is what his views
on men and women and marriages are quite
quite interesting actually i man his
relationship anyway but the aristotle
does say the relationship between a man
and a woman is fundamentally political
it is not like the relationship between
master and slave it's fundamentally one
of political equality but you know um
one of the one of the great standards
aristotle says down is that the way that
we have equality in a democracy is
through rotation
that today
you may be the mayor but tomorrow i may
be the mayor that today you may be the
judge in this court case and i'm in the
jury but tomorrow
i may be the judge you may be the
defendant someone else is the truth that
each of the positions in government will
rotate that they're not uh perpetual so
unlike a monarchy unlike an aristocracy
it's not the case that one person is
born to be king or one person is uh born
to a class of rulers notice the rule but
that the principle of rotation itself is
how we how we have uh have equality and
it's certainly very easy to imagine when
you look at it that way that there could
be a kind of dynamic equality between a
man who's 39 and a woman who's 20 that
there are some things in the
relationship where she is in charge
where she is showing initiative where
she is even dominating uh the man where
she's asserting her will and she is
getting her way
maybe not every day maybe today she gets
her play at tomorrow the
the fan does you know uh uh so on and so
forth okay i'll take a moment here to
glance at the uh
uh glance the comments uh atlanta
richard says i bet melissa reads the
comments
first but why does she not comment as
well and melissa's attention is
completely endorsed the the performance
as the following do you want to say
something what
i'm watching yeah no she sees it live
bro so no sorry
um
okay nacho uh who is aka not chat nacho
is actually a female contributor here
says the only relationships that have
ever worked for her have been with men
significantly older than herself um
okay but look okay
i really want to say this this is the
main point of this video
if you think something is not optimal
and if you can even theorize
hypothetically something else would be
optimal right that doesn't have anything
to do with distinctions of of good and
evil you know you'll just never you'll
never come to that conclusion you'll
never you'll never be able to make an
inference about the goodness or badness
of this relationship or the goodness or
badness of this particular man just
because he's older than you right now
you know sorry for any of us no matter
what age you are um
if someone is 10 years older than you
are they therefore a bad person
is your relationship with them therefore
a bad relationship are they you know
what is the moral influence from that
even if you concede that it would be
optimal to instead be with someone
exactly the same age now i think nobody
wants to reason that through because
they'll realize just how weak the
argument is for it being optimal to be
with some of this image so let's let's
be all the way real here so i'm now 42
years old
if someone said to me seriously that
they thought it would be
optimal for me to be with someone the
same age as myself
my answer would be no
you're confusing what's optimal
with what's easy
okay it would be easier it would be
lazier for me to be with someone the
same age as myself you know what maybe
that's true across the board like maybe
that's true with you know for the
younger partner as well as for the older
part like maybe it's easier to be in a
relationship with someone who grew up
watching
the same tv shows as you who watched the
same tv shows on nickelodeon the same
season of sesame street who saw seinfeld
same thing who went to the same rock
concerts like maybe there is something
easier even if it's just a product of
the cultural familiarity of being with
someone exactly the same as yourself
instead of having that that age gap you
know maybe it would be easier for me to
be with someone who could relate to me
because they've been through
the same sorts of experiences over the
same the same number of years but i'm
not willing to concede that that is
optimal for either party or that that's
morally best
you know like what if there's something
really wonderful and really positive
about me taking the time and making the
effort to share with melissa who's more
than 10 years younger than me
to share with her my experience and my
education and what i have to offer right
like what if there's something that's
positive for her and what if there's
also something that's positive for me
now when i say something that's positive
for me
a lot of you in the audience haven't
studied math since you were 14 years old
i i'm like sorry i don't know maybe you
stopped at 18. but a lot of us we
learned math at a very early age then we
didn't really think about it for years
what if someone offered you as a job say
look and i'm assuming math isn't your
fascination i'll say hey you know what
why don't you brush up on your math and
tutor
my cousin like they've got a cousin we
want you to go through
wow
okay you would have to kind of learn in
math again
in teaching it to someone else all right
even if there were nothing else positive
in this relationship for me and there is
there's all kinds of positive things but
even if there were nothing else positive
the fact that i have to explain whatever
it is i have to explain that i have to
share what it is i have to share with
someone who is uh a younger outsider and
that way someone who's alien to my
worldview someone who doesn't have my
background someone who certainly didn't
study any of the same things myself in
in high school university someone
someone who is also the product of of a
different time i mean you know we joke
about it a lot but it's true there
really are differences between us you
know generationally that way okay
that process of teaching for me
is also a process of learning and of
course it's partly relearning things
i've known it's partly challenging
things i've known right and then also
there are things where i realize and
reflect how much my own understanding
has changed say versus 20 years ago or
15 years ago or something you know so i
just give an example i mean you know
okay so melissa has now read karl marx i
am not a marxist i'm an anti-marxist
melissa read a lot about um the history
of communist china while we're together
too i am not a communist i'm an
anti-communist it's not it's not why i
wear a red shirt guys um you know uh uh
you know the the point being
even if i learned nothing
came said even if i learned nothing by
teaching her about that stuff and by
going through the process with her while
she's reading those things i i would
still benefit enormously from being with
her as as she's learning that stuff so
you know would it be easier
for me to be with a woman who's 40 years
old and who already like myself read
karl marx when she was a teenager who
already like myself read about chinese
communism decades ago and is maybe half
forgotten about okay that'd be easier
but that would just be kind of affirming
my own fatuous certainty in those things
now you guys know if you watch channel
melissa also while she's with me has
read a very large number of books from
ancient greece and rome uh more greece
than rome you know ancient athens
philosophers like aristotle and so on
well obviously going through that with
her and you know she has questions for
me and i have to explain things and
stuff
the way in which that challenges me the
way in which i'm gonna learn even if i'm
learning nothing new in reality i
learned a ton of news in the last four
years i've learned so much new stuff
really but even if you just see that as
a process of me recapitulating what i
already know and share with others i
benefit from that tremendously now
let's add a significant footnote here
do you think there is a 40 year old
woman who has already read aristotle
and who is not already married with kids
i mean like the assumption that that
alternative even exists for me is absurd
right like if the idea that there is
such a woman i could be with right uh
the idea that it would be morally
imperative for me to reject this younger
woman so that i could be with an older
woman who again is is hypothetically
optimal for me right but what does
optimal really mean does it really
indicate something about morality or
does it just indicate something about
laziness i'm just going to return to the
guy in the title this video for a moment
okay so keemstar he's 39 years old he is
a successful internet
personality he does news commentary i
suppose you could say right
you can make a case his life would be
easier and in some sense it would be
optimal if he could find and fall in
love with a 39 year old woman who is
also
a professional news commentator who is
also a highly successful you know you
could imagine okay he could be in a
power couple with someone his own age
his own kind of experience no kind of
background
right but that's not actually a moral
imperative that's actually not an
ethical argument and you're actually not
even making a claim about something
being optimal like who is that
advantageous for advantageous for who in
what way as opposed to in being in a
relationship with somebody that's
starkly unequal
and it may indeed benefit the the
younger person far more than it benefits
him so i'm going to get back to reading
your uh comments and questions guys feel
free to hit the thumbs up button so more
people can discover this scandalous
conversation feel free to ask more
questions that i can that i can answer
i'm i'm happy to do so but look you know
um
i had a friend in laos
i was close friends with this guy um
so i maybe we were friends for just one
year
but it was a very close friendship and
he was 50 years old the time he went
from being 50 to being 51
and he was engaged to be married
to a shockingly younger woman so let's
say she was 20. i forget this now
something to mention about this younger
woman she had already been married and
divorced
so she was 20 but i think she got
married the first time at 16. so somehow
she got married at 16 and divorced at 18
already so you know
um
she was she was not an innocent in this
in this game she was not innocent
specifically in the game of marrying
older men and of this guy's circle of
friends i was the only one who said
sorry i was almost don't do it don't
marry her it's bad it's a bad choice
you're bad it's it's uh it's it's a bad
catch
now remember one of his other friends
taking me aside and um
this other friend was actually kind of
furious with me he was like how can you
say this how could you say this back and
and the reason why he was furious was
that he was presuming my argument was
kind of like this thing we're talking
about today it was kind of like outrage
against keemstar for being with a
younger woman
and i said so i've got to give this guy
a fake name now what am i going to do
fake name you want a suggestion
no
john john okay
um
you know and i remember so this this guy
was talking to i said no my argument is
not that it's bad for the younger woman
i'm actually arguing that this
relationship is bad for john
you know
and i said look
how do you describe john at this stage
in his life
john
he was basically someone who could have
been a lawyer and decided not to be a
lawyer he wanted to have a more creative
life and at that time he was an aspiring
novelist and working very hard on his
first novel okay
so 50 years old
aspiring novelist right i said
he is
choosing to be engaged to they didn't
get married they did end up canceling um
i could tell that story too anyway he is
choosing to be engaged to
a 20 year old woman
who can't read
period
she's literally illiterate
that's a phrase you know you're
talking about sharing your life with
someone who is never going to appreciate
what it is you're doing as an artist as
a writer you know however you want to
put it someone who's going to be
profoundly alienated for you and unable
to relate that way now i did not i know
okay just being real i was less this is
many years ago i was living in vienna so
i forgot i'm here so 15 years ago
now you know i didn't make the
simplistic argument like oh he could be
with someone his own age
and he probably can't be any woman worth
having who's already 50 years old she's
already married with kids and
unavailable or if she doesn't want kids
she's still unavailable if they're women
who don't want kids but at age 50
they're spoken for they're off the
market but the point is you know look uh
even if he was going to be with a woman
who say 25 or something we could pick
some some age someone who's half his age
he's 50 and he's listening
he could be with someone who has a
degree in english literature you know he
could be with someone who has some
interest
in writing the life of the mind so it
can be someone who shares with him these
aspirations even if they think his
writing is lousy frankly if they don't
support that like no like there are
really serious questions here about
about uh common ground so you know
um
now what what actually happened
uh was quite interesting
he dumped his fiancee
and started sleeping with a young woman
the same age
who was employed by his fiancee's mother
as a cleaner as like a house cleaner as
a like a lowly domestic servant this is
in a third world country this is in
house now i remember i met i met her too
and um she was gorgeous she was a really
good-looking young woman the one who was
uh
i forgot she could have been 21-22 she
wasn't a teenager but you know and again
in that culture
it's actually past the age of getting
married he was a really good-looking one
but they they all perceived her as ugly
like within that culture because she was
poor and because she had dark brown skin
this isn't uh this is really colorism
more than racism but in that culture
this perception like oh you have you
have dark skin you're poor you do a lot
of hard work outside
remember but you know
i remember the first time that woman so
this woman who'd been the the house
cleaner came over and and chatted with
me i was that time i could speak lotion
pretty well times would change i could
revive it
i remember she just she just seemed
really sharp just seemed really smart i
think she was someone who never drank
alcohol you know it makes a big
difference and actually let me tell you
a lot of alcoholics there you know we
chat a little bit she she just had a
nice smile and a nice laugh you know we
i made some jokes and you could tell she
was smart and i remember i just looked
at david like
[Laughter]
and just in the look you know he he
completely broke down he laughed for
like eight minutes or something
i mean you just gotta be a student i
figured i was like
i i'd uh
i caught the switcheroo in action before
it happened i was like oh
oh
[Laughter]
anyway um
[Music]
yeah so my my criticism um however well
intention didn't save his soul
but yeah you know okay so all right we
got more we have more questions to come
to but it was just just an example in
real life how you deal with these things
and again you know
the fact that something is not
optimal you know like this is not the
best
possible
scenario for you doesn't mean that it's
that it's immoral
bad evil and wrong
and it also doesn't mean that you have a
better alternative so you know i just
said melissa and i we've had a wonderful
life together these past four years we
really have i just i just want to say
like in terms even if you just look at
this youtube channel we've lived in
china we've flown to greece like you
know we've kind of flown around the
world we lived in taiwan melissa started
studying chinese she's currently
learning chinese i'm about to probably
today i'm going to start studying
chinese again i've had a break from
studying chinese because i'm writing a
book i'm an aspiring writer myself i
guess
age 42. you know we've had a lot going
on but you know we've been around the
world we've lived in wonderful
conditions you know we've had this very
productive very intellectually vital
life not so great in terms of youtube
views
i would have been better off falling in
love with jacqueline glenn in terms of
the number of youth
but you know i don't i don't measure the
success or wonderful my life is in terms
of my success on youtube but you know no
it hasn't it hasn't we haven't been a
power couple in terms of uh uh achieving
success on youtube but you know in many
many ways this has been a wonderful
relationship for both of us have had a
wonderful life together uh for for four
years oh yeah also france germany
whatever even where we've been within
canada in the united states in a lot of
ways despite despite tremendous hurdles
like we went to we went to college
together and we had to drop out of that
college because they hated us because we
were vegan that's the whole drama it's
ridiculous
there have been in this you know there
have been kind of very difficult
circumstances um
to struggle against but like you know
it would be very easy for someone on the
outside to look at that situation
at any point in the last four years
to look at that situation say oh well
this guy
he doesn't have a job he doesn't have a
career therefore it would be better what
do we mean by better optimal
advantageous more you know do you mean
more
it would be better for you to dump him
and find a guy who has a job who has a
career
isn't that an easy thing to say you know
whether you're talking about an age gap
difference or might isn't it
but maybe what you're actually saying is
immoral maybe it's actually evil right
maybe what you're actually saying is
whatever it is that makes this guy
special whatever it is that makes your
life together with him wonderful
whatever it is that makes this
intellectually rewarding and educational
and you know taking you around the world
that china and greece and everything
else maybe all of that counts for
nothing you should dump him to get with
some anonymous imaginary hypothetical
stranger
because of this nitpick i'm
offering you because of this criticism
or this fault i've found people have
tremendous faults and and you have to
stay in relations with them anyway i
mean whether that's business
relationships or friendships people can
have really serious you know moral
failings and an age gap it's actually
not a moral failing it's actually not my
fault that i'm born in a different year
from my girlfriend that's not so chosen
if you're an alcoholic it's your fault
if you're a gambling addict it's your
fault you know frankly if you're just
lazy and don't read books it's your you
know like there are things that are that
are your fault but you know all kinds of
people they're in a relationship and
they they wish their husband was reading
about politics or philosophy instead of
watching soccer on tv
they wish their husband was motivated
intellectually or as a political
activist to make the world a better
place instead of watching football
instead of watching ice hockey on tv but
you know they make the decision look
this is my man
even if he watches ice hockey on tv even
if he has these faults and there are
some good things about the relationship
presumably and you're going to you're
going to work with that you're going to
work with what possibly you have in
common you know
um so
these are the these are the commitments
you make and
to to what extent to what extent you
know are we all just victims of a trick
of language you know whereby in our
language and our culture we conflate
what is good
in a moral sense with what's good in the
sense of things being being optimal and
even when we talk about things being
optimal
do we just mean that it's convenient do
we just mean that we get to be lazy
rather than doing the hard work because
a lot of a lot of relationships they can
be good
but they're they're not easy they're
going to entail a lot of
a lot of hard work
okay
all right i got a question from atl
richard i legit do not understand
so
uh i can only answer questions i
understand
so
this this is off topic but maybe right
on topic so melora comments that lawyers
always need to get sessions with
dominatrixes
they must need to feel pain to feel
alive
um
you know i i think a lot of people men
and women although men and women cope
with this differently
they live lives in which there is no
adventure
in which there is no risk
and what they want to pay for
in the little bit of spare time their
job leaves them maybe their job and kids
and their family responsibilities
the little bit of free time they have
left by those responsibilities what they
want to pay for is the illusion of doing
something risky of doing something
adventurous and
you wouldn't you see that in the
phenomenon of bdsm paying someone to
whip you or cause you pain or beat you
up you see that in adventure sports
things like parachuting or what have you
but i even saw that in terms of people
going on vacation in cambodia and laos
back when those places still were
considered dangerous today i don't know
maybe laos is now so safe you know
there's nothing like that but you know i
remember one young man
saying to me that you know he was sick
of life in the united states because it
was just too safe he wanted to be
somewhere where he could really risk his
life and he managed to do that he raised
his life doing incredibly stupid things
in southeast asia you know but you know
that that idea that you can buy
heroism you know and on a really deep
level what a lot of men and women i
think women cope with it in a different
way what a lot of men are lacking is the
opportunity to be a hero which relates
again to the sense of morality and moral
superiority now i just mentioned i have
certainly known women
who again whether their job is in a
cubicle or whatever they have some
boring job
they have a boring safe marriage and
home life they have all those
responsibilities and when they want to
feel danger when they want to feel like
they're taking a risk one of the ways
they can do it is of course going to a
bar and having sex with strangers or
sleeping with their husband
men do that too
british british men especially that's
very british to me
that that particular type of of cheating
italian men and french men have a
totally different way of cheating it's
true it's true i'm sorry but it's true
when french men cheat on their wives
they have a whole parallel like they
have all parallel life with the other
woman you know but when british men
cheat it's about alcohol and the pub and
strangers you know different things
culturally these these these stereotypes
this real reason obviously obviously
they're exceptions
but you know uh um my point is sexuality
itself can offer this kind of false
sense of risk adventure and heroism i
think heroism is maybe the saddest and
sickest part of all people talk about
sex as if it's a conquest as if it's an
accomplishment as if you've done
something great and you know what what
have you really done you know you've
you've found someone who's who's
who's willing to love you or try you
know it's no no heroics there there's no
uh there's no real risk either you know
[Music]
all right
that's a great question although i feel
it's another video so atlanta richard
says lol
isil gave me the advice that i should
dominate my budding relationship with a
lady because she was not vegan uh for
some democratic couples would work
though uh
okay so this is poorly
poor grammar addiction i know i know the
kind of situation you're talking about
and i can imagine whatever email we had
we had back back and forth you know
so this comes back to what i said now
at the beginning of this video
uh maybe instead of
um
[Music]
maybe instead of
regarding
relationships as being optimally
egalitarian
maybe we can admit to ourselves that in
all relationships
each partner dominates the other in
turns from time to time for one subject
rather than another so if you're in a
relationship where one person is a vegan
they feel very passionately about their
diet their ethics morality in this
province and the other person
is
just indifferent to this issue like
there's no reason to assume a vegan is
dating someone who is a pro-meat
activist that there's someone who
actually feels it's morally positive to
kill and eat animals they're probably
someone who grew up with default
assumptions about the diet and life you
know they don't care passionate about
one or another it is
natural to assume that in that
relationship the vegan is going to
dominate the non-vegan in that part of
their life now you guys may not know
this i used to be single
it happens i know what i know it's
amazing to think that we was ever any
time in my life known as but you know
you know i had
the the possibility or the probability
or the option of being in relationships
with women who were way more physically
fit than i was women who really go to
the gym and really care about that
really put in a lot of work
now
i i wouldn't say i'm totally indifferent
to my own physical fitness it's not that
high priority so for the last like six
months
writing my book has been a way higher
priority than going to the gym and i've
actually been talking about that with my
girlfriend like look as soon as i finish
the book i'm going to spend more time at
the gym but they they really did compete
for time and priority in life so if i'm
writing a book the gym doesn't matter as
much that's that's the way i'm living
right and you know there are certain
standards i hold myself to in terms of
fitness but you know
if i had instead of starting this
relationship with melissa if i had
gotten with one of her several uh
competitors at that time it's totally
possible i could have been in a
relationship with someone who was really
passionate about and really putting a
high priority on going to the gym and
then
she would have in that respect dominated
me in my life that there would have been
pressure on me even if just to go to the
gym as often as she just to physically
make the trip to the gym at the same
time there would have been pressure on
me to to have that in my life in the
same way and why not like what's what's
wrong with that like we can dominate
each other and have a positive
relationship that's good for each of us
where each of us is holding the other
higher standards now if i had been with
one of those women
we're talking about particular women
here we're not generalizing i would have
probably created a lot of pressure on
them to read more books and know more
about politics and talk and think in a
much more erudite way than they ever had
in the past you know that's that would
have been pressure um going the other
way in that in that respect and if they
didn't want that they wouldn't you know
they wouldn't want to be in a
relationship with me i mean some women
you know they actively want that uh
stimulus to kind of be all they can be
in that sector and vice versa it'd be
totally sensible for a man to want to be
with a woman who's really athletic
because the man
man thinks hey me too i can be more
athlete
so you know i just say i don't in this
sense i don't see veganism as any kind
of special
issue that way i think it's a typical
issue when we're talking about
inequality and domination so let's come
back to the title of the video here
briefly
the illusion is that keemstar's
relationship with a 20 year old woman is
immoral
because they will be unequal in all
things because the power dynamic the
the power dynamic and quotation marks
whatever that means right that it will
mean that keemstar is exercising
dominion over her in every process i
just say anyone says that you don't know
people you don't know relationships you
don't know the extent to which the 20
year old woman can be in charge in nine
areas at a 10. and certainly in terms of
you know youtubing that's
keemstar's area of greatest strength in
terms of like the actual performance
side of what is of course he would be
dominant because this is his whole
career it's his whole area of talent and
it's what he's putting all his time and
energy into but really every single
other thing in his life the woman could
be dominating him and he could be making
the decisions partly because he doesn't
have the time that he doesn't he doesn't
make it his priority you don't know you
don't know who's in charge in that
relationship there's absolutely no
reason for that there's no reason to
assume it's some kind of slavery and
again what are the implications are you
really going to argue or are you really
going to assume without arguing it that
any relationship that has an inequality
of a power dynamic is immoral that to me
really does entail sort of beta male
morality that every man that entails the
tenet that every man ought to be
a beta male you know so it looks we have
a question
a good question from do you want to give
me lucas stop sexualizing my comment
section
so that's that's the person's name is do
you want me that says out of curiosity
would you consider doing in afghanistan
last year you know i'd love to i want to
make more videos talking about
afghanistan i care about it a lot
unfortunately i feel like my own
audience doesn't care very much about it
but yeah i'd love to talk about talk a
bit more and i think about it all the
time right now so yeah it's very much on
my mind and on my heart frankly what's
what's going on afghanistan um i have
made videos about it in the past you can
look up unsurprisingly
um
but yeah all right uh griff mccoy says
ditching the beta dynamic helps my own
relationship a ton but it is very hard
being lazy and giving the girlfriend
dominion feels good and she even likes
it in the short term but not the long
term so here's someone who has real
world experience sorry i was going to
say before you know when i was involved
with buddhism
there was this really weird division
between people within like buddhist
studies buddhist research buddhist
scholarship whatever
there were people who knew buddhism in
real life they'd been to cambodia they'd
been in the rice fields they'd been in
the like they knew the anthropological
reality of buddhism in cambodia doesn't
matter if you use cambodia sri lanka
myanmar whatever the example is they've
lived with the reality in the field
and there were all these people who only
knew about it on reddit like they were
reddit buddhists they were internet only
but internet chat forum plus and you
know you get into conversations people
and sometimes only after a little while
you figure out who they are oh you're
one of these people who doesn't have
real life experience yes so griff mccoy
um
you know i i totally relate
to what you're saying and
you know i have had relationships in the
past
look laziness is common to both genders
there's nothing feminine about there's
nothing the vast majority of people are
lazy the vast majority of the time like
even if you're hard working in one part
of your life you're lazy in other parts
of your life like this theoretical
lawyer we keep talking about he's
hard-working at his law office in the
law firm but then he's lazy about
everything else's life it's very it's
very common they're only some parts of
your life and like i'm hard-working
intellectually but maybe i'm lazy with
everything else you know like really i
can i can criticize myself maybe there
are other things i'm i'm lazy about just
look at this kitchen
no no seriously though seriously um uh
within this year the amount of time we
spend cooking
it's it's dropped to almost zero because
we both have other parts i mean melissa
also has really is things she's devoted
to doing with her time intellectually
like melissa's now studying chinese
chinese takes all the time you can put
into it we used to bake from scratch i
used to bake bread melissa baked uh
cakes and other things from scratch
and we stopped baking i am not
complaining i'm totally happy
but i used to make pasta i'd make
red sauce like tomato sauce some
scratches a lot of time you know making
it and cleaning up i'm doing anything we
used to make pancakes if any of you guys
know me i would use to send out pictures
on my social media the food i was
cooking and stuff i don't do any of that
anymore we do we do broccoli beans
protein powder
corn pops shout out to corn pops
[Laughter]
you know what i mean like um uh so you
know that is an example of laziness
where it's like look i want to put all
my time and energy into what i'm doing
uh productively but look you know so in
terms of this comment from griff griff
mccoy um
yeah you know like i really i really
feel you and the question the question
can be i mean okay why does it feel good
to be lazy you know
it feels good partly because you're
trusting the other person to make those
decisions for you that's exactly the
same for men and women right it's
exactly the same for the older or
younger person it feels good whether
you're 10 years younger than another
person you're 10 years old the other
person to sit there and say okay you
know what
she's going to choose the airplane
tickets for me
you know what i mean or vice versa
whatever this thing is i'm using
airplane tickets because there were real
consequences if they bought bad
airplanes like what the hell did you do
you know you picked the wrong airplane
and you know um
i mean i mentioned recently i was in i
was in this relationship with a very
good-looking blonde woman many years ago
i referred to as my blonde ex-girlfriend
for that reason so i only had one who
was blonde and like you know you get to
a point in the relationship where you
just realize if this relationship is
going to continue i have to be the
dominant decisive person for everything
forever i'm always going to have to buy
the airplane tickets i'm always gonna
have to
examine everything and make whole
decisions down to every every detail and
that feels awful it feels terrible to
feel like you can never trust the other
person and yet in this sense that you
can you can never be lazy so i think
every relationship is going to have a
push and pull this way oh and by the way
my blonde ex-girlfriend she's older than
i am
it's not it's not an age gap
relationship that's an intellectual gap
relationship she's older than i am she
was then and she still is now you know
um
so yeah you know um
all right so hold on we got a lot of
comments coming in junebug says there
are red flags women need to watch out
for when older men are interested in you
okay junebug
that's true
but it's also true of younger men it's
also true of men the same age right i'm
sorry
but like
oh my god do you know how i mean look so
juba i'm not saying this students told
you have you tried dating 19 year old
men
like do you know how dangerous and
screwed up it is to be in a relationship
with 19 year old woman do you know how
tumultuous how hard to control how you
know what i mean do you know how rough
it is to be in a relationship with a 19
year old man like what if you talk about
a 30 year old woman with a 19 year old
man
you got your you got your work cut out
for you you know what i mean and guys
like i would i would not have been easy
to date at 19 either like i know what i
was like
at 19. great in the sack
i'm wait i'm way better in bed now i
mean i'm sorry but that's also the
reality is most most guys get better at
sex as they get older uh
anyway yeah
and you know and that that's a factor
too i mean whenever you're comparing
whenever you're talking about age
how important is age in the age gap
compared to any other one factor whether
that's emotional intellectual or even
sexual would you rather be with someone
the sage same age as yourself if the sex
is terrible or someone with a 10-year
age gap and that the sex is great and
may not be the most important thing in
life but my point is even just one
factor like that will be more important
than the age gap just like veganism just
like uh politics or religion like oh
someone might say to me hey hey eisel
you can be with a woman who's the same
age as you
uh but she's catholic
i mean like one factor like just one
factor
the age gap is going to be of trivial
significance compared to just one factor
like that in terms of the difference
between people what brings them together
and what what keeps them apart
so yes so junebug look i i don't
disagree with this um she says there are
red flags women need to watch out for so
i was looking today at the youtube
channel of dax flame i'm just gonna put
in his name in case you in case you
don't know
dax flame he's a youtuber terrible
channel don't don't watch it um
so tax flame is now 29 years old right
what advice would you give to a woman
if she says she's going to fall in love
with she's gonna start a relationship
with dax flame
how would that advice be different if
the woman were
five years younger
the same age or five years older how
would it be different
10 years younger same age 10 years older
like there were red flags with that guy
i've it could be for any guy if you
don't know what i'm talking about
doesn't matter there are a lot of red
flags there's a lot wrong with that dude
right
but you know the the significance of age
regarding isolation
right it's like before when i was
talking about someone who's a drug
addict or someone who's a gambler you
know whatever it is well if someone's a
drug addict and they're the same age as
you
oh you know i'm sorry the red flag is a
red flag either way so yeah a reason
reasonable point but in this
sophisticated sense
i i disagree with you okay
all right so so okay here's another good
question so dude i'm taking this
question completely seriously i'm not
going to insult you or dehumanize you
most people would just insult you for
saying this man goenka says quote
wouldn't it be fair to say that it is
easier for you to be in a relationship
with a 20 year old due to her being less
assertive as a function of rage close
quote
do you know the meaning of the word
you think 20 year olds don't throw
tantrums you think 20 year olds don't
throw their shoes at you you think they
don't throw plates at you
you think 20 year olds don't have
meltdowns you think 20 year olds don't
scream at you you think 20 year olds
don't kick you out and you have to sleep
in a hotel for a night or they go out
and sleep and stuff you think 20 year
olds don't cheat on you to get revenge
like you think 20 year olds like it gets
worse
but like are you joking in terms of
being assertive you know like i get i
get the stereotype i get where you're
coming from here like you are assuming
that someone who's 20 is going to be
more diffident more submissive
than someone who's 30. that is a
completely false assumption
someone who's 20 is gonna have less
self-control and less self-discipline
and less experience
than someone who's 30. and they are
going to handle the same emotions in a
more violent and more ultimately
childish way
than someone who's 30. so like you you
talk about the same conflict it's like
i don't know let's get a kind of
mediocre
normal relationship conflict like we
were saving up this money for us to have
a vacation together but instead you went
and spent the money on
on something else so this is kind of
mediocre couple conflict
how does a 20 year old handle that
conflict how does a 30 year old handle
that conflict so i'm i am not saying
this to insult you uh man i'm going to i
like i'm not
i just i genuinely
disagree with you right
now if you don't really know people like
if you don't really know what a
relationship is like
inside and out maybe you just see see
let's say you have a dude who's 30 years
old and his girlfriend is 20 and you
just see them out eating dinner like you
meet them at a rest your
two couples together and you see well
the 20 year old just kind of sits there
quietly because
she doesn't have much to say in the
conversation you might be imputing or
inferring from that that she is
submissive
in all things but you're you're dead
wrong
all right you're completely wrong
now you're saying her being less
assertive
right
she may be more ignorant about the
things she's being assertive but it
doesn't make you less assertive you know
have you ever heard the sentence i want
i want have you had someone screaming at
you i want blank before have you had a
20 year old screaming at you i want fun
really
i'm sorry and you know the same conflict
how a 30 year old would handle it like a
30 year old might also say to you look i
want blank but the way they say it and
the way
the conflict is negotiated the way it's
dealt with it's going to be different
you know
[Laughter]
melissa is contributing a lot here just
through eye contact and facial
expressions she knows she knows what i'm
talking
um
okay and and you know look guys i'm not
saying i really sympathized any of this
stuff
um
you know i think it still is worthwhile
to talk about the way in which these
things can be can be bad and evil and
wrong i'm not i'm not cheerleading for
for keemstar here i think that the moral
condemnation of keemstar reveals a lot
of things that are fundamentally bad and
evil and wrong in our culture you know
that's that's really my point here i
came here with kind of two big points
about that
um and one is like look are we assuming
that every relationship morally ought to
be a beta male with a dominant female
and
i mean if so
geez the competition for a good woman is
intense
just just to find a good woman
it's intense but if if i wanted a woman
who could dominate me
intellectually
think about how intense the competition
for that is before
i was married to a woman with a phd from
cambridge university i wanted someone
who was my equal or my superior if i
could get it great i was just saying
great let's if let's find someone who's
better than me i'd be so happy to be in
a relationship with someone who can look
down on me as their intellectual
inferior how how many women do you think
they are of any age who in that sense
like are you know are able to dominate
me or able to look at me could i could i
be with a woman who would read my essay
about chinese politics let's say i'm
writing an essay about chinese pokemon
just like
yeah well that's quaint like oh eisel
you're a beginner like you know a woman
who's so much further advanced just in
chinese politics to give an example a
woman who would read what i'm writing
about aristotle and be so anxious
yeah you know why though this is the
kind of thing i used to write like 20
years ago like
all right like you know you think this
is an option you know you think you know
in the whole world like you know how
and it doesn't matter so i'm saying
intellectually but you know like the the
presumption the person so but if i could
have that if i could
and being real with you i mean there was
one woman i i didn't like her voice
that's why i lost interest she's
possible she's watching this right now
there was a woman who was a professor of
philosophy
and she was trying to get with me
just a few months before i i got with
melissa and so when a situation goes
with me we're all adults here this is
not teenage you know she was talking to
me and you talk about in a respectful
way hey this is your situation in life
this is my situation why it wasn't
wasn't some kind of crazy seduction or
something you know what i mean um
and you know anyway so i really i really
didn't like her voice she was very good
looking but i remember we talked we
talked on skype just once and the voice
the voice didn't do with me but like
you know so let's just say this woman
and i i don't
i don't think she was really that
that intellectually uh
advanced but let's say for the sake of
argument this woman who's a professor of
philosophy
um let's say she really is my superior
intellectual and she can look down on me
on some of these topics like aristotle
okay
are we really saying that that is
morally superior to my being with a
younger woman where i'm helping her make
progress reading the same philosophy
let's just say it's aristotle in all
cases i'm with a woman who's more
advanced than me and helping me with
aristotle as opposed to i'm with a
younger woman who's less advanced and
i'm helping her learn aristotle
why what's the moral difference
it's the same relationship twice over
right like you're the comparison there
isn't a difference between good and evil
and then beyond that
if we're saying that one is optimal and
the other is sub-optimal what what do we
really mean right because actually it's
the same imposition like if you're
saying what it's kind of stifling me
that i have to help someone who knows
less about aristotle than i do well with
the other woman it would be stifling her
to help me so you know again i think
it's a big big deep profound problem
and i admit most people are not
interested in aristotle
not all my examples have been so have
been so erudite but whether you're
talking about aristotle you're talking
about buying airplane tickets or having
a screaming fight with one another uh
over family finances you know what i
mean there's this same question of
superiority and inferiority
inferiority dominance participation and
the the democracy on a tiny scale that
exists uh within a relationship
um
all right a lot of quality comments here
guys thanks for thanks for contributing
to the conversation
all right so another one from men and
goenka so he's obviously been told this
by by his friends by personal friends
menen gomenka says quote uh he says i
think and it has been told to me by
these men that it is easier to be in a
relationship with someone way younger so
why would that be different with the
gender is reversed
right again i i just i sincerely
disagree with you okay
i mean you know
something as simple as asking your wife
or girlfriend to do something for you if
you are with someone who is older and
experienced and they already know how to
do it
that's easier than someone where you
have to teach them and coach them
through it and help them and educate
them at every step of the way to do it
right i'm sorry but in terms of what's
easier
right no it's easier to be with someone
who's already got all the training and
all the life experience you know
um
you know sorry we made a trip to bangkok
thailand once this is a no big deal low
pressure you know thing okay so i'm
older i'm more
i've lived in bangkok i've worked in
bangkok i've been there many times so
when i go to bangkok with a younger
girlfriend melissa i do everything for
her and i'm explaining everything
getting from the airport to downtown and
the subway and the train says that i'm
taking her to the museums i'm talking to
her about the history and politics
right
it would be totally different if i were
with a woman my same age at the same
level of experience a woman who herself
knows the way around bangkok airport and
can do all that stuff for you that you
can do it with you as an equal she can
do it for you
right
uh you know but i'm sorry i think this
is a real
misconception you know what what do you
mean by easier so no for the older party
it's gonna be harder to be with a young
person in every way including their
ability to cope with stress so yeah this
is nothing scandalous but there have
been times when just the stress of
dealing with things at an airport
melissa is kind of freaked out and
snapped at me and been really rude at an
airport you know what i mean i we can
all relate to that like i'm just saying
i don't i don't i'm not like that myself
that's just not how i cope with stress
but i can totally sympathize that she's
freaking out because she's kind of
overwhelmed with dealing with these
situations in airports these are
sometimes airports and third world
countries you know whatever you know
there's different kinds of stress that
goes into it you're dealing with the
luggage and this weird bureaucracy or
whatever you know um
no an older person wouldn't freak out
that way at the airport and melissa
today wouldn't freak out that way she's
had a couple more years of experience
and so forth so no i i really don't i
really don't agree with you what's meant
by by easy right now reciprocally though
i am helping her like i'm making it
easier for her because i do have that
age and experience i also have that
detachment self-discipline and
self-control
so
you know if if melissa had been dating
me when i was 19 years old i couldn't do
that with her you know what i mean like
you know if sorry if we're both 19 years
old uh hypothetically which is
impossible obviously but when i was
younger there was a time when i was
struggling to cope with those things um
and whether it's the airport or doing
the dry cleaning or the financial
stresses and savings or whatever you
know or all the things that happen with
pregnancy and raising a kid and dealing
with hospitals and medical authorities
and schools you know i'm sorry but but
real life cooperating with someone when
you have a kid in the school system or
you have a kid and you got to deal with
doctors
no age and self-discipline and
it really matters sure and so it's it's
in no way
easier to be with someone younger than
yourself it's harder at every stage
including it's harder just to deal with
arguments and disagreements absolutely
it is
so so
new
crowd i do not remember you new baby if
if you've been here before i think i
remember the name huge baby says quote
hope i'm not overstepping but i'm
wondering if you'll ever go into
repairing your relationship with melissa
i remember you uploaded a video about
breaking up and now she's uh uh awesome
videos on your channel so thanks for
that thanks for the compliment
i'd love i'd like to you have some
creative input into melissa's
you guys can probably tell but yeah i am
collaborating with her and making those
videos and i i think
i think i'm i'm i think i'm helping you
improve with the quality of views at
some point at some point i'm sure she'll
do it this is actually a great example
of this kind of age gap relationship
thing i'm sure at some point you'll be
able to do 100
solo but currently i do i do participate
and are making your videos and i
influence them in various ways
for the better rather than worse so
anyway so uh to continue this comment
from niche baby a pretty big turnaround
might be some life lessons in that story
well i think that videos like this are
about that i mean i i agree that's a big
part of the story arc on this channel
was just how tough just how difficult
the relationship with melissa was for me
not for you know no offense
you know but it was very asymmetrical in
this way i'm i'm talking about here you
know obviously i'm not going to say
absolutely everything this relationship
was was easy for melissa but this was a
relationship where i could provide a lot
more and i could cope a lot more and
where i could comfort her a lot more so
again i'm not going to say anything
scandalous here but there were many many
times when melissa lost her temper and
created a problem in the relationship
and then even though she was the one who
had created the problem i had to be the
one who was calm and attached and
helpful and solve the problem you know
what i mean it wasn't a situation where
i could suffer or weep or something or i
could i could endure these things and
expect her to step up and solve the
problem so you know it's like i had to
be responsible even when i wasn't the
one responsible when i shouldn't be
responsible and again a lot of a lot of
age gap relationships are going to be
like that whether it's the man who's
older or the woman's mother the only
thing i can add is
some people are incredibly immature at
an older age you can also someone who
has all the disadvantages of being older
but but none of the um
none of the advantages
so i i just find this interesting
mangoenka is continuing he says taking
your example isn't it easier for you so
isn't it easier for me
in terms of what you have to do for your
partner and what you gains out of the
relationship to be with someone who's
reading karl marx right now
as compared to someone who is for
example a female version of you wouldn't
you have to sacrifice or work more for
no it's completely the other way around
no so again i i don't know so men and
going i'll give you an example that that
makes this real clear when i met melissa
she spoke zero chinese she didn't know
hello she didn't know i am she couldn't
say one word in chinese she'd never read
any choice i i had studied chinese for a
couple of years
however you want to measure that
so i had to teach her chinese i remember
i taught her how to say
i am in chile we started with the
absolute basic here's how to hold the
pen here's what i i taught her the
absolute simplest route yeah you know
you know when you do wool you know like
starting with the absolute simplest
rudiments of chinese so i taught her the
chinese language from level zero and the
phonetic distinctions remember we used
to go for long walks together and while
we were walking i pointed a sign and
pronounced the words okay now this is
that thing you couldn't pronounce before
and again it's easy to forget that now
but this is the most important root of
miss language now you get to take it for
granted like the phonetic distinctions
that real bedrock learning you know so
you know language makes this very easy
to relate to very easy to understand and
it wouldn't matter if it were chinese or
english or italian or some other
language but in this case it happens to
be chinese so if you say wouldn't it be
easier to be with younger person no
it would be easier for me to be with
someone who has already studied chinese
for 10 years
of course of course that would be easier
i wouldn't have to do any of that work
and on the country they could help me
you know now as i said at the beginning
of this video there's a sense in which
it helps me to to explain those things
you know i get to kind of learn it again
and go through that process but no in
terms of easier
you know no it's not easier the question
i'm raising getting is how do we make
moral judgments about this how do we
make ethical judgments about it and how
do we even make judgments about what's
what's optimal you know but i've gone
back and re-learned the basics of
chinese in in teaching her but it's hard
work just the number of hours is
tremendous and by the way i mean i think
that's a tremendously positive thing in
melissa's life i think she's benefited
from it at every stage including like
when we were first starting four years
ago it's very different what was going
on at that time of relationship versus
now in terms of learning languages and
so on but yeah yeah yeah
um
all right sorry i have a lot of i have a
lot of comments here and i am actually
trying to read all of them so just give
me one give me one second guys
okay so junebug says i think this is an
inevitable facet of the conversation
junebug says still there were gray areas
of the young adults and older adults uh
you just need to keep an eye on the
predatory ones groomers who target girls
when they're under age like 17 dot dot
dot
thinking of anessian lol
um
okay
this is my honest response to that
you'll notice if you watch my videos
over time there's a lot of vocabulary
that i very intentionally avoid using
that's because it's vague
now
vagueness is neither good nor evil but i
think it has a really deleterious effect
on us intellectually
and morally when we rely on vague
concepts
what does predatory mean
what does abuse
or abusive mean now in some particular
context we've added a lot of other words
to the paragraph
it may be clear what you mean but
relying on these words alone i think
actually leads people into i think it's
a crucial part of the unexamined life
being trapped in the loop of living in
an example life and that's what i see
going on with this language about power
dynamic which is what i'm challenging in
this video as a whole the idea that
there's a power dynamic that in a
self-explanatory way
makes something good or evil okay
instead of talking about what's
predatory
let me challenge you to think in terms
of
short-term
versus long-term
and in terms of what is self-centered
and selfish
as opposed to what is really about
mutual benefit and benefiting others
i think that's the kind of two criterion
access
that's what's really really important
here
now okay i don't most people you don't
know who we're talking about when we say
an scn he's become an incredibly obscure
figure on the internet after being
um
after being famous for quite some time
you know
okay
if you're in a relationship with someone
who's
10 years younger than you let's say
against someone who's 30 with someone
who's who's 20. um
[Music]
are you getting involved in that
relationship for reasons that are short
term
and self-serving
are you getting in that relationship for
reasons that are that are long-term
and that really are explicitly thought
in terms of benefiting the other person
and benefiting the two of you together
so whether you think that is mutually or
both people in question i think that's
what's really important
and once you recognize those criteria
then the question of the age gap
suddenly becomes much less important
because the same problems can exist
between two people who are both
30 years old and they do
you know there are people in their 30s
who get into really exploitative
unequal relationships where people just
have a short-term
uh short-term sexual exploitative
attitude towards uh one another
um
[Music]
now you know i'm just gonna press a
little bit further
when we're talking about people who are
30 40 50
we're mostly talking about married
people we're mostly talking about people
who are not
single and we're mostly talking about
them having
extramarital affairs
or some kind of swinging
open relationship
and you you are talking about
but that can't be
a man who is 30
having sex with a woman other than his
wife
but his interest in her and his interest
in his engagement in that relationship
is purely self-centered selfish
self-serving and purely
short-term
right i think there's a really important
sense in which that's evil
right and the age gap doesn't really
change it much
one way or the other
now
some of you will know right away what
i'm talking about some of you won't
it is very possible for a young woman a
woman of 20
to be in a relationship with an older
man where she is the one who is
self-serving self-centered
selfish and is viewing this as a very
short-term thing where it's an
exploitative relationship and where
she's the one who's who's doing the
exploitation you know
now stereotypically this is when it's a
wealthy older man and the younger woman
is basically taking his money away from
him there's a lot of that that goes on
and it happens differently in american
culture and italian culture and in
japanese
culture but
you know there are a lot of older men
who are susceptible to that and there
are some young women it's a very small
percentage but there are some young
women who in a very canny intentional
way
are in that in that sense exploiting uh
the older man in their relationship and
if anyone finds that hard to visualize
guess what it happens in the gay
community to a massive extent you can
have young men who are hustlers who know
exactly what it is they're they're
selling so to speak who are pursuing and
taking advantage of older gay men and
the same kind of the same kind of thing
so you know
um
short term versus long term
really matters
and i think it matters from day one you
know if you're just flirting with
someone in your instagram dms
is this somebody you want to know for
the rest of their lives like you know
maybe you have sex for three months
you know you have a short term like the
actual love affair is brief but there's
someone you remain friends with or
someone you may concerned about there's
someone who's life you're contributing
to positively
until you're 90 years old you know and
that's what you like from the beginning
you know this is someone i want to care
about and like in that sense support for
this lifestyle when you say support i
don't mean financially but you know
they're going to go on maybe and get
married to someone else and if kids but
you still want to support them and know
them you still want to be part of their
community in that positive way um that
is a very fundamentally wholesome
dynamic that's
massively undervalued in our society as
opposed to
you know people using each other as a
you know as a short-term solution to a
short-term selfish problem you know so i
i that that's that's my answer to that
great question from michael harvey
michael harvey says quote a 20 year old
woman is more likely to set your clothes
on fire and key your car because you
didn't message back quickly enough
facts years ago
i made a video talking about teenagers
and teenage behavior and i said i i
think it was i think it was about an
issue it was criticizing i said
do you know
any 16 year olds if you know a 16 year
old girl look at how she treats her own
best friend like two female 16 year olds
a 16 year old girl and her 16 year old
female best friend look at the
unbelievable cruelty and barbarity of a
16 year old treats her own best friend
or her friend's plural right and now
compare that to
a 26 year old a 36 year old a 46 year
old how you treat your friends or your
colleagues even when you have really
deep
divisions between you even when there
really is something to to fight over you
know
and yeah just the violence of the
emotions the lack of detachment the lack
of self-discipline that you're dealing
with
it's it's a big it's a big issue
but on the other hand you know how is
anyone supposed to progress if they
don't start taking on
bigger responsibilities and grander
ambitions you know so melissa has made a
lot of progress since she started a
relationship with me and she started to
really take on more responsibility and
more
more ambitions and have further
horizons
in her life so she starts to develop
into a better person more rapidly she
would have had some personal growth you
know foreign but it it really
it really steps up your game and steps
up the intensity you step up your own
efforts
and the rewards you're getting for those
efforts are way uh
look wow this is a great example i do a
live stream talking about the war in
afghanistan and nobody has anything to
say i do a live stream talking about age
gap relationships i get a lot of real
quality really wonderful quality uh
constantine
so uh paprika says quote in my
experience either party can exploit the
other
similar to what i was just saying she
says quote a 20 year old can control and
exploit a 40 year old just as much as a
40 year old can exploit a 20 year old
close quote
yes
i do however think it's natural that
people presume
the opposite you know
i can't fault people in the audience for
assuming
someone who's 40 will be older and wiser
and more powerful
but i completely agree with you
often enough in life paradoxically it's
it's the other way around
there's no no doubt about that
um
[Music]
you know getting older is not getting
wiser but getting older is an
opportunity to get one
okay june bug says quote when you do
this deep dive into it i can see the
nuance but i don't imagine your average
joe lusting after a an 18 year old
having those same most thoughts okay so
junebug um thanks by the way i can take
the compliment thanks um
okay look you know
i think part of the problem here is the
difference between looking at a
photograph
and looking into someone's eyes in real
life and dealing with them a person to
person okay uh
there are 18 year olds and like again i
think a good example are olympic
athletes whether male or female like if
you look at an 18 year old who's an
olympic athlete male or female they have
the body of a 25 year old like they're
they are the most developed 18 year olds
in the world they don't have a typical
uh 18 year old body or something and i
think i don't know if there's no minimum
age in the olympics it used to be there
were 16 year olds and things there were
there were younger people i don't know
that varies from support to sport now if
you know once in a while there's someone
who's really talented at their sport and
they're at the olympics you know even
even younger than 18 but if someone is
an olympic athlete
you can take a photograph of them you
know at the olympics and just wow you
know the their body and face and maybe
also even the sense of uh
ambition that's in their eyes or
something that can look incredibly
attractive but you know if you actually
sit and talk to that person face to face
for one hour
they're young they're dumb they're
ignorant they're probably on
an ego trip that's really reverberative
and all they know about is basketball
you know whether it's a woman from the
women's basketball team or a young man
like you know this is going to be the
kind of shallowest stupid person uh
imaginable you know
yes you know the problem is most people
they think about 18 year olds as
as
instagram models whether instagram
models or uh olympic athletes or or
hollywood actresses or or what have you
and you know the the image may be
attractive but who they are when you
talk to them is really quite another
thing so i'm going to tell a story
really briefly but this has always
struck me in real life just actually
talking to people who's actually
relating to people there was a teenage
girl who was taller than i am
with her shoes on so i think her natural
height was was six foot two i'm i'm six
foot three in the morning
uh the spine collapses as the day is on
so depending when you bump into me i may
look six foot two or six with three
remember this girl i mean she wore
heels that gave her some elevation so
she'd be taller than me she was a
teenage girl
and she was brought in to my german
class i was learning german as a
language at that time uh
because of this like work study program
this in their school system do this kind
of thing so she came in
and at a distance like even if you're
just three meters away from her she
looked 25 years old she didn't look she
didn't look like a teenager she looked
like a fully grown adult absolutely and
by the way because she was coming in to
be an assistant teacher as far as she
was wearing kind of conservative clothes
that a that a 30 year old teacher would
wear she was kind of frumpy outfit which
is totally appropriate for being a
teacher and yeah at a distance like down
the hallway or even just like if you're
sitting at the back of the classroom and
she's in the front class you think she
was 25 years old you might think she was
30 years old
and always when she came over to correct
uh the work i was doing in german i was
sitting and talking with another person
german now i may be getting the example
wrong but it was something like that she
came over to correct it and she just
started rubbing out she started striking
what i was saying and correcting it and
me and the guy sitting at each other we
were working on this journalism we're
looking at like what what the hell is
the matter with you and the the older
professor so he was like 50 years old
the guy who was the main professor he
just just seen the expressions in her
face he comes over and he's looking he's
like why are you why are you rubbing
that out that was that was correct that
was really correct
and what it was was i described i'd
written in german about an airplane
landing on pontoons
on the water
and she was like oh well no he must have
made a mistake airplanes can't land on
the water
and i mean everything about her the look
in her eyes and the way she's talking
you know you realize this is a child
in an adult's body you know what i mean
like you know as soon as you're
interacting with her as soon as you're
talking to her
um
you know if anything you feel kind of
pity
for her you don't you know
it's it's very different from looking at
a perfectly foes pardon me it's very
different from looking at a perfectly
posed photograph on instagram or
an image of an olympic athlete running
over the line you know what you fall in
love with isn't a photograph it's the
whole person and what you get into bed
with and have a relationship with isn't
the photograph it's the whole person and
that's again a reason to emphasize
long-term relationships and not having
just selfish motivations but motivations
that really um consider the benefit of
the other person so yeah i think those
are really the ultimate uh limits for
dealing with dealing with younger people
um
and i think younger people themselves
would admit that if you just talk it
through with them hypothetically if you
ask them about
their perspective and talk it through um
you're dealing with the same
yeah
you know
something i say all the time is you
can't ask people to be more mature than
they are
you know you can't ask people to take
responsibility for things they're not
responsible for right so think about
what it's like to be in a relationship
with someone who can't take
responsibility you can't be responsible
even if they promise you that they will
even if they want to you know like they
they can't do it
you know um
it's a terrible thing whether you're
talking about someone who's a drug
addict and they're irresponsible for
that reason or someone who's so young
that they're not capable of taking
responsibility for their actions their
decisions in the way that an adult would
okay uh
raph daily says not related to the video
but wondering wondering when we'll get
to see you speak on a political topic in
chinese
like the rest of your videos wow we'll
see man i've done it in the past but
well we'll see
um
i'm going to be a full-time student of
chinese
just a few weeks from now we'll see how
much i get back into chinese but it's
not very rewarding for me to do that on
the internet um yeah i don't know
i i i could talk about it for half an
hour now but i think there's no point
great anyway great question thanks for
taking time to write down wrath
men
says i really appreciate the earnest
answers and the almost correct
pronunciation of my hard to pronounce
name so uh mana and i used to study pali
sopali is a a language from india but
it's an ancient language uh from india
so i can i can pronounce words in pali i
can pronounce words in sanskrit okay
but i've never studied a modern language
from india so wherever you're from uh it
may be pronounced a little bit
differently
just catching up with your comments guys
plenty of quality meaningful comments
coming in that i i can't respond to all
them
so
natasha says i think the key distinction
is that you don't value what's easier
for its own sake
okay good
good comment natasha but let me let me
ask why
and then answer it
right because this comes up with people
in my life
reasons unrelated to sex right
okay
you know there are
all kinds of things where i say to
people
why would it be easy
i said is that what you want do you want
to do the easiest thing do you want to
take the easy way are you sure are you
sure you want it to be easy are you sure
hey like i say this to friends of mine
all the time
right
why not take the easiest path why not
right because
the question is what kind of person am i
what kind of person do i want to become
i don't want it easy you know i want to
take the harder path so i become the
harder man
uh chris giovannetti says i'm curious to
know why you feel it's important to
learn chinese i think i can just take
one second now
and uh get you the video on that i mean
i think i think i have a perfect video
melissa's in it too the two of us
talking and title is something like the
time to learn chinese is now so i think
that is a good video to shout out
sorry guys let's just take a break this
will
briefly delay this video
i can't find it i can't find it
there we go the time to learn chinese is
right now
and um you'll see it as a very memorable
um
very memorable thumbnail
but yeah
i i i have to invoke youtubers privilege
here and not uh daryl and answer your
question because i've already answered
it in a dedicated video on topic
and to me that's a very meaningful video
i've shared it with friends of mine who
responded by one of my friends he he
dropped his major in university and he
was talking about learning chinese
instead i don't know if he'll do it i
don't know if he'll actually switch but
he decided to drop his major and do
something else and he was talking to me
saying he was going to drop his major
and learn chinese so i know that video
has impacted a lot of people um in a
significant way in their lives
okay so menenganka says totally good
point quote moral judgments i think are
irrelevant to these considerations about
what is easier or optimal okay so
i'm going to argue against myself here
all right
okay
so we've been talking about what's good
for me whoever me is me you
keemstar anissian talk about what's good
for me what is good for oneself
we've been talking about what is good
for the other person the person you're
in love with who may be 10 years older
than you and they may be 10 years
younger than you okay but there's a
third category here that we have not
been explicitly
mentioning at all hasn't gone this video
that's what is good for society as a
whole when you scale it up right
that is the basis on which people impute
moral significance ethical significance
and moral judgments to this right
what people will say is
oh if everyone dated somebody 10 years
old themselves society would collapse
if you know if if all of the older men
were dating younger women society would
collapse or vice versa if it was all
older women with younger men societal
collapse they're they're scaling it up
and they're proceeding from the
assumption that whatever
cannot be viable for everyone should be
viable for no one this is a false
cantianism so to speak this is a candy
immorality this way of this way of
thinking okay
and here is the counter argument
if everyone became a medical doctor
society would collapse
if everyone became a philosopher society
would collapse if everyone became a
political leader society would collapse
if everyone became a filmmaker society
collapsed and there was absolutely no
moral argument there for whether or not
i should become a filmmaker whether or
not i should study philosophy whether or
not i should become a medical doctor
right you're correct if everyone did the
same thing society would collapse but
the ultimate conclusion of that is that
everyone should not do the same thing it
doesn't actually have that implication
for any one particular thing right some
people should become medical doctors
some not others
some people should be in relationships
with a person 10 years older or 10 years
younger
not others all right so that's a totally
self-defeating way of thinking of of
taking this question and scaling it up
for society as a whole and then drawing
moral judgments that's a third category
that we managed to get more than an hour
of the way through this video without
mentioning without
it coming up at all but that's what's
going on people's minds now i might say
some people who know melissa in real
life
some people are going to leave
completely unnamed and undescribed some
people who know melissa think that way
some people think it is morally wrong
for me to be in relation with melissa
even though we're more than four years
deep into this and you can see the good
and the bad of it the harm and the
advantages and the disadvantages you can
draw your own conclusions about this and
how much it's benefited melissa
certainly right
and they still think this is morally
wrong for me they still think this is
morally wrong in principle because they
claim if everyone did it it would be bad
like it's not something
i would also compare this to racism
you know i mean there are people who are
opposed to
different ethnic groups having kids
together because they say oh well if
everyone did it
you know what what would happen then and
it's a really it's a false optic it's a
it's the framing of the problem that's
profoundly
it makes the question not worth
answering you know put it that way
okay a question do i speak russian no i
do not one of my grandfathers was fluent
in russian and it died out in my family
so you know my own mother did not learn
uh russian from her father um i have
considered learning russian at one point
in my life in many ways a very
unappealing language for me to study
compared to the many many different
languages i have said
junebug says that he or she uh remembers
seeing an afghan-related stream yes i
did i recently a few days ago i did a
live stream on afghanistan and i may do
another one in future we will see um
okay get a thanks from chris for uh
uh the link to the chinese language
video oh good
i hope i hope you get all the joy and
the misery of that video because
learning chinese is one hell of a lot of
work it's a big decision to make
oh wow
this guy should get his own youtube
channel so someone in the audience
called ben says that he was 20 years old
and his ex-girlfriend or ex-wife was 27.
quote she never worked and i was the
breadwinner i fell into the mgtw
it's a subculture here on the internet
um
basically
if it's not if it's not misogynistic
what is i have to ask you it's a
so-called pro-man occult that really is
anti-woman and he says he fell into the
mgtow cult and left her after four years
he then later left mgtow as it serve its
purpose i guess he says he thinks he was
too young and too stupid
wow so dude you gotta you gotta start
your own youtube channel and talk about
that
um
you know i want to ask something else
and this this really is one of the most
taboo topics of all is
you know how old does someone have to be
to handle marriage to handle raising
children
you know let alone to handle being in a
relationship of the kind we're presuming
in the western world where dating and
messing around goes on for years before
you're committed to uh marriage and
raising children that that kind of
relationship you know um
many many years ago when i was single in
in china
what i found was that i met a lot of
young women who were really mature for
their age because they had started
working in a convenience store at like
age
15 or 16
like
they'd just taken on some
responsibilities that way running a shop
talking to customers also in a totally
non-sexualized workplace you know it's
not like being a bartender or something
where you flirt with people but like
they had the experience of working in a
small
shop grocery store maybe even a
restaurant or something their parents
had this kind of business and at that
time china had a one-child policy it
wasn't traditional in chinese culture to
involve your daughter this way it would
normally be only the sun it's a really
really bad culture that way before the
one child policy there's a big change in
the one child policy and
you know they they learned how to take
on responsibility they learned how to
talk with people they learned how to
think about the future and plan for the
future and you know their parents had
also probably explained to them like
okay if you want to set up your own
corner store you want to set up your own
convenience store we can help you do it
where you branch off and start like now
you've learned how to run and manage the
shop so when you finish university if
you want you can do this but like you
meet young women there who in this way
were tremendously mature for their age
now i know
i mean it's a taboo topic you know it's
taboo for two reasons
one is that the suspicion is any man who
talks about this is trying to justify a
relationship with a much younger person
that shouldn't be justified you know
coming back to all these questions of
morality right but the other is that
this has implications for our own
culture and how we infantilize people
both men and women how we treat them as
being trapped in a perpetual childhood
until they're 24 or 25 years old right
where people don't take on any
responsibility
until they finish their bachelor's
degree until they finish their master's
degree until some very very late stage
and you know i just want to say i mean
it's not it's not that i'm opposed to
university as such
in american culture in the 21st century
university is like summer camp it's like
summer camp with quaaludes university is
not thought of as a tremendously serious
time when you buckle down and read
aristotle and do research that's going
to shape what you do for the rest of
your life university is not seen as a
time when you work in an intense way to
raise the level of your writing so that
you can publish peer-reviewed articles
or be publishing articles in magazines
university is not seen as a
crucible
where you work as hard as you possibly
can to develop into a mature you know
intellectually impressive person where
you go from being a teenager to being an
adult in a positive sense you know
university in the united states of
america is seen as a succession of binge
drinking nightclub visit parties by the
way just look at elon musk how he
represents his own time university and
what he did in university but you know
university is seen in the united states
of america as a period of sexual
self-indulgence reckless behavior
and
keeping yourself locked in this kind of
very immature state of mind
right up until you're 24 or something
like that you know so i i just say i
think i think they were really
disturbing questions for us to ask
ourselves when we deal with
on that cultural scale
like if we are really saying that people
at age 20 or 21 are just not prepared
to be in a serious relationship and
i think i think there's a sincere
argument the commitment okay but then
let's say why you know let's really ask
ourselves why and how is it that people
make it to age 20 or 21 and they're
totally emotionally unprepared and
totally intellectually unprepared i
think that the serious answer is that
both are our formal education
and the informal education that takes
place inside the family and to some
extent by the church by you know
religious and other organizations that
was not even the education we have from
listening to music
and watching movies keeps people locked
into this kind of reckless
infantilized self-indulgent
self-destructive lifestyle until much
much too late in life i mean i think you
shouldn't you shouldn't go through a
phase of life that way at all i mean i
think i think uh sex is always deadly
serious and pretending that there's such
a thing as low consequence sex it's
ridiculous it's pretending there's such
a thing as a low consequence falling in
love falling in love
impacts you tremendously the rest of
your life you know even if it fails you
have a failed relationship you you you
love and you've loved and lost you know
so no i i think it's very serious
business
and um
[Music]
you know
how how did i start i started with the
example
of young women in china who knew what it
was to manage and run a corner store
convenience store you know
well how does that prepare you to be in
a serious relationship obviously it does
in some ways and not others right i mean
obviously you know i mean in some ways
might seem like the most laughable thing
you know how how does that prepare you
well it prepares you in a way that
watching movies and playing video games
and you know going to college fraternity
parties and going to nightclubs and
getting drunk the way that young people
in america spend their time it really it
really fails to prepare them
for those challenges and taking on those
kinds of responsibilities okay
i have a question about nihilism there
is a playlist for all the videos on
nihilism so just go to the playlist
section of my channel to find that i'm
sorry not to cut you short but i don't
think i need to play with that a lot of
people don't even know there is a
playlist actually click on playlists and
then the the particular playlist is
called historical nihilism calling my
own philosophy i'm certain you'll find
what you're asking about in there
somewhere and it's in it's basically in
chronological order thank the list of
all the videos
[Music]
so james mickenpine says again that
these kinds of comments that just come
from people of real life experience as
opposed to reading this on the internet
james megan pine says that he's in his
early 20s and that most of the women he
talks to are at least 10 years older his
ex was 15 years older and he's now
involved with a woman who's 48 years old
and he says this is a very true
statement there are all kinds of
imbalances in both directions
right
so you know
even if you think it is optimal to have
no power imbalance
in a relationship right
does that mean that any relationship
with a power imbalance is immoral or bad
or should be should be gotten rid of
you should break up with someone or shut
them down
in the name of the pursuit of this ideal
of what you think of as an optimal
relationship in which those power
balances don't exist or can we
appreciate what's good about those power
balances this guy james may combine if
he if he really falls in love with this
woman who's 48 years old maybe she
really has a lot to teach him maybe she
realized a lot that'll benefit him in
life
you know again maybe emotionally not
intellectually maybe that'll be really
positive for him
um and maybe not
but you know those those the kind of
risks you take and um we all have to you
know we all have to live with those
kinds of power balances so here's here's
a cross-cultural example i know all
about someone in the audience writes in
that his ex-girlfriend ran circles
around him and she was thai
she was an expert in this i'd say
it was a lot of responsibility for me
supporting her family as well i'm glad i
did it but i think i got taken to the
cleaners
thai culture is is notorious for this
this kind of uh situation
so we got another reply from ben he says
that he'd like to go vegan before
starting a youtube channel but it'll
work on it so okay great maybe we'll get
another vegan on youtube uh talking
about these kind of issues of uh sexual
politics in practice
okay guys great conversation thank you
all for uh contributing i'm i'm gonna
wrap it up what did i have to say in
this video you know the most general
philosophical point was about
distinguishing what is optimal
from what's moral or immoral what do we
really mean when we say that something
is good well as soon as we admit that
we're talking about something being
optimal rather than moral immoral then
we get into the questions of good for
whom and good for what good for what
purpose good what for what reason people
don't want to admit this themselves they
want to moralize the discourse about
relationships as if it were a
self-evident evil to have an age gap of
of 10 years now
beyond that we had to say further that
even if there is a disadvantage to
having an age gap that has to be seen in
the real world context of human beings
overcoming and coping with the numerous
paradoxical disadvantages of being in
any particular relationship with any
particular person and if you want to
treat this as something that is a
self-evident you know uh evil on planet
earth if you want to treat it as as
being
self-evidently wrong for someone to
choose to fall in love with someone
who's 10 years old
what about all of the other things that
we're leaving off the table for
consideration
isn't it immoral isn't it wrong to fall
in love with someone who is an alcoholic
in love with someone who is a gambler or
a drug addict you know like if we start
listing off the characteristics of human
beings and things that they really have
chosen things they really are
responsible for
right uh that would invalidate them as a
potential partner then that list is
going to be tremendously long and the
reality is none of us chose the
circumstances of our birth you didn't
choose whether you were born black or
white you didn't choose whether you were
born young or old like i didn't choose
to be born in one year as opposed to as
opposed to 10 years later so you know i
think the ultimate source of discomfort
we have
is dealing with the question of power
inequality in relationships and
admitting to ourselves that all
relationships are going to be unequaled
not just in one way not just because of
a difference in age not just because of
a difference in money but they're going
to be unequal in myriad ways they're
going to be some aspects of the
relationship where one party dominates
the other and and it's sometimes the
relationship and then at other times the
relationship when dealing with other uh
aspects the relationship of dominion
will be inverted each of us has to take
responsibility in a relationship but we
will tend to take responsibility in
unequal ways
and out of that inequality wonderful
things can happen as we've been hearing
from people in the audience people can
learn a lot they can benefit a lot from
being in a relationship with somebody
who has different strengths and
weaknesses to themselves
and maybe we don't benefit at all
if we are in a relationship with someone
who is our absolute equal in every
respect something that is going to be
impossible to achieve or at least
unlikely in the extreme thank you all
for joining me